JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, a look
at a photographer's
more-than-decade-long project
documenting
hope and despair in her
hometown.
Jeffrey Brown has that story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Braddock,
Pennsylvania, about
nine miles outside of
Pittsburgh, a once thriving
steel town of some 20,000, now
down to one-tenth
of that, and captured through
the very personal
lens of LaToya Ruby Frazier, the
32-year-old
winner of one of this year's
MacArthur fellowships.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER,
Photographer: I see myself
as an artist and a citizen
that's documenting
and telling the story and
building the archive
of working-class families facing
all this
change that's happening, because
it has to
be documented.
JEFFREY BROWN: These days,
Frazier teaches
and lives in Chicago, where we
talked to her,
but her true home, her childhood
home, is
the one found in her work.
It's a project titled "The
Notion of Family"
that she began more than a
decade ago, documenting
three generations of
African-American women
in a particular time and place.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: My
grandmother, who grew
up there in the '30s, when
Braddock was prosperous
and a city itself that everyone
came to, to
my mother growing up there in
the '60s during
segregation and white flight and
the beginning
of the collapse of the steel
industry, to
myself growing up there in the
'80s and '90s,
when the factories were already
dismantled
and the war on drugs kind of hit
its peak.
JEFFREY BROWN: Educator and
photographer Lewis
Hine used his camera for social
reform. Photographers
from the Farm Security
Administration documented
the poverty of the Depression,
the pioneering
work of Gordon Parks in the
1940s and '50s.
Frazier sees herself working in
this tradition,
first and foremost, though, as a
visual artist.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: The art
comes in with
how it's crafted, how it's made,
the material,
me understanding the history,
because the
images, they're not purely
documents.
If you look at them, first and
foremost, the
fact that I appear on the other
side of the
camera lets you know that this
is contemporary
art, because now I'm performing
and doing
gestures in front of the camera
to create...
JEFFREY BROWN: You're part of
the scene.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: ... the
narrative and
the scene, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: But are they
posed photographs?
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: They sit in
between staged
and documentation.
If we think about the image
"Grandma Ruby
and Me, 2005," I know her
routine. I know
she will get up, she will have
her Folgers
cup of coffee, she will smoke
her Pall Mall
cigarettes, she will clean her
dolls.
So, looking at my grandmother
one day, I said,
well, grandma, could you redo my
hair the
way you used to when I was a
child?
So, I'm in my 20s in this image.
So, I come
and I sit next to her while
she's rearranging
her dolls. And then we both
quietly happen
to look over our shoulders, and
the cable
release is running behind to the
camera, and
I press the cable release.
And so that's how it sits
between documentation
and actual staged portraiture.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2013, Frazier
flew in a
helicopter above Braddock to
expand her view
of the town.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: I just knew
I had to
shoot this, so the family could
see what was
happening to their property.
JEFFREY BROWN: And to capture
the plight of
one particular home owned by the
Bunn family
in the neighborhood known as The
Bottom, right
near the old plant. It's now
surrounded by
bundles of crushed rubber tires.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: And what's
interesting
is, at one point, anyone who
immigrated or
migrated to work in this factory
lived exactly
these two blocks.
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: And this is
really important
to me because it's not about
being black or
white. This was our rites of
passage, so it
didn't matter if you came from
Germany, Croatia,
Italy, Africa, North Carolina,
or South Carolina.
We all lived here together.
And over the years, these were
all, through
eminent domain, taken because
people died
from terminal illnesses,
couldn't upstand
or keep their homes. And then
this family,
the Bunn family, decided that
they didn't
want to move.
JEFFREY BROWN: In more recent
years, a new
story of Braddock has been told,
one of grit
and revival. Levi's even used
the city in
a 2010 ad campaign called "Ready
for Work."
CHILD: Maybe the world breaks on
purpose,
so we can have work to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: Frazier isn't
buying it.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: Out of
concern for this
narrative and what I saw as
propaganda, I
started to make the portraits to
counterbalance
this narrative. Right. It's not
an empty land.
It's not a frontier. Like,
people actually
live here and have been dealing
with the environmental
crisis for decades.
JEFFREY BROWN: She points to
government policies
and corporate decisions like the
closing of
the main hospital, which had
served many in
the town, including Frazier's
own family,
who say they suffer from
environment-related
illnesses.
The fight over the hospital was
captured in
a 2012 documentary by Tony Buba,
who's been
filming life in Braddock since
the 1970s.
The protests became another
point of Frazier's
own mix of art and activism.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: So, here,
I'm talking
about the history of protests.
JEFFREY BROWN: Taken altogether,
it's a complicated
picture. Frazier wants us not to
forget those
who continue to struggle amid
the changes.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: I'm not
saying that it's
a dying town. I'm saying that we
survived.
Like, look at all of the damage,
all the abuse
we have endured, and we're still
steadfast
and existing. So, for me, it's a
triumphant
story. It's really a testimony.
It's not -- we're
not dying.
JEFFREY BROWN: Even though it
looks -- I mean,
much of it looks so depressed
and depressing-type
scenes.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: But look at
me in the
flesh right now in front of you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: I'm not
that girl.
JEFFREY BROWN: And she plans to
use the money
from the MacArthur grant,
$625,000 over five
years, to continue to document
and complicate
our picture of Braddock,
Pennsylvania.
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."